DOCSP-46701: Serialization (#168)
mongodb/docs-pymongo: source/serialization.txt

.. _pymongo-serialization:

=============
Serialization
=============

.. facet::
   :name: genre
   :values: reference
 
.. meta::
   :keywords: class, map, deserialize

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

Overview
--------

In this guide, you can learn how to use {+driver-short+} to perform
serialization.

Serialization is the process of mapping a {+language+} object to a BSON
document for storage in MongoDB. {+driver-short+} automatically converts basic {+language+}
types into BSON when you insert a document into a collection. Similarly, when you retrieve a
document from a collection, {+driver-short+} automatically converts the returned BSON
back into the corresponding {+language+} types.

> The following list shows some {+language+} types that {+driver-short+} can serialize
> and deserialize:

Reviewer: [s] Suggestion to reword this so that the action of the sentence is more around what you can do instead of the subject being the list:
```suggestion
You can use {+driver-short+} to serialize and deserialize the following Python types:
```

Author: I can take another crack at this, though I do want to convey that this isn't the complete list of serializable types.

- ``str``
- ``int``
- ``float``
- ``bool``
- ``datetime.datetime``
- ``list``
- ``dict``
- ``None``

For a complete list of {+language+}-to-BSON mappings, see the `bson <{+api-root+}bson/index.html>`__
API documentation.

Custom Classes
--------------

> To serialize and deserialize custom {+language+} classes, you must implement custom logic

Reviewer 2: Does it make sense to explicitly call out that serialization and deserialization are required in order to work with custom data classes?

Author: That was my intention with this sentence, but if you feel it's not clear enough I can make it more explicit.

Reviewer 2: I think it's clear enough.

to handle the conversion. The following sections show how to serialize and deserialize
custom classes.

Serializing Custom Classes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To serialize a custom class, you must convert the class to a dictionary. The following

> example serializes a custom class by using the ``vars()`` method, then inserts the
> serialized object into a collection:

Reviewer: [n] Update to align with [style guide](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/meta/style-guide/terminology/alphabetical-terms/#t):
```suggestion
example serializes a custom class by using the ``vars()`` method, and then inserts the
serialized object into a collection:
```

.. code-block:: python

   class Restaurant:
       def __init__(self, name, cuisine):
           self.name = name
           self.cuisine = cuisine

   restaurant = Guitar("Example Cafe", "Coffee")
   restaurant_dict = vars(restaurant)

   collection.insert_one(restaurant_dict)

To learn more about inserting documents into a collection, see the :ref:`pymongo-write-insert`
guide.

Deserializing Custom Classes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To deserialize a custom class, you must convert the dictionary back into an instance of

> the class. The following example retrieves a document from a collection, then converts
> it back into a ``Restaurant`` object from the preceding example:

Reviewer: [n] Update to align with style guide like the above:
```suggestion
the class. The following example retrieves a document from a collection, and then converts
it back into a ``Restaurant`` object from the preceding example:
```

.. code-block:: python

   def deserialize_restaurant(doc):
       return Restaurant(name=doc["name"], cuisine=doc["cuisine"])

   restaurant_doc = collection.find_one({"name": "Example Cafe"})
   restaurant = deserialize_restaurant(restaurant_doc)

To learn more about retrieving documents from a collection, see the :ref:`pymongo-retrieve`
guide.

Serializing Ordered Documents
-----------------------------

> Because the key-value pairs in {+language+} dictionaries are unordered, the order of

Reviewer 2: All versions of Python we support use ordered dictionaries where the order of inserted keys determines the order of the dictionary. Is the behavior described here still occurring, or is it an artifact of older Python versions that still had unordered dictionaries?

Author: I grabbed the info from [this FAQ page](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/languages/python/pymongo-driver/troubleshooting/#query-works-in-the-shell-but-not-in-pymongo). However, I see that this page was pulled from PyMongo docs, which leads me to believe they haven't been updated in a while.

Should I just remove this section completely?

Reviewer 2: Ah, that makes sense. Yeah, that section of the troubleshooting FAQ should be removed for being inaccurate.

This whole section can be removed, yup!

> Because the key-value pairs in {+language+} dictionaries are unordered, the order of
> fields in serialized BSON documents can differ from the order of fields in the original
> dictionary. This behavior can cause issues when {+driver-short+} compares subdocuments

Reviewer: [s] I think this could be edited to avoid repetition, it seems clear without this bit: 
```suggestion
Because the key-value pairs in {+language+} dictionaries are unordered, the order of
fields in serialized BSON documents can differ from the original
dictionary. This behavior can cause issues when {+driver-short+} compares subdocuments
```

> to each other, since {+driver-short+} only considers subdocuments to be equal if their fields
> are in identical order.

Reviewer: [n] Update to align with [style guide](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/meta/style-guide/terminology/alphabetical-terms/#s):
```suggestion
to each other, because {+driver-short+} only considers subdocuments to be equal if their fields
are in identical order.
```
